---
title: "Usage"
---

## Input and output

SCALCE is a FASTQ compression tool designed specifically for the Illumina-generated FASTQ files.
SCALCE will compress provided FASTQ files and generate three output files with extension:
- `.scalcen` for read names, 
- `.scalcer` for reads, and 
- `.scalceq` for quality scores. 

The read length should be fixed in any of the mates in one run. This means, if you are passing 3 paired-end libraries, then the read lengths in the first mate should be fixed (i.e. 50bp). The read lengths for the second mate could be different that those of the first mate.

## Requirements


## Parameter explanation

### Mandatory parameters

- `-o, --output`
  
  Specifies the prefix for the output file names. Extensions and basic information will be appended. Standard output is supported in decompression mode. Use `-` to indicate standart output (i.e. `-o -`). Standard output is supported unless you use `-S` or `-r` parameters during decompression.

### Shared arguments (both for compression and decompression)

- `-r, --paired-end`

  Use paired-end FASTQ files when the two ends are in seprate files. The files should be named with `_1` and `_2`. When you are passing it as input, only give `_1` file and SCALCE will replace `_1` with `_2` and read the second file.

  File name example: `XX_1.fq XX_2.fq`

- `-n, --skip-names [library]`

  Discard original read names, and rename each read with the library prefix, such as `library.1`, `library.2` etc.  This option can improve compression rate a lot.

### Utility arguments

- `-h, --help`
  
  Prints short usage information.

- `-v, --version`

  Prints the current version of SCALCE.

### Decompression arguments

- `-d, --decompress`

  Uncompress scalce files. Provide just one file name (`scalceq` for example), 
  and the program will take care for the other files.

- `-S, --split-reads [count]`

  Split the output files into a bunch of files, where each file contains the
  given number of the reads.

  Default: **0** (do not split)

### Compression arguments

- `-B, --bucket-set-size [size][MG]`

  Set bucket set size (M)egabytes or (G)igabytes. This parameter limits the main memory accessible to SCALCE. Swap files will be used to keep all neccessary data.

  Default: **4G**

- `-c, --compression [mode]`
  
  Select compression mode. Currently available modes are:
  
  - *no* - No compression
  - *gz* - gzip compression level 6
  - *pigz* - parallelized gzip
  - *bz* - bzip2 compression

  Default: **gz**, or **pigz** if number of threads is greater than 1

- `-A, --no-arithmetic`

  Disable arithmetic coding for the quality compression and use default compression mode. This helps reduce both compression and decompression time, but the compression ratio may suffer. 

  Default: **not activated**

- `-p, --lossy-percentage [percentage]`

  Set lossy error percentage.
  
  Default: **0** (no lossy)

- `-s, --sample-size [count]`

  Specifies how many quality values should be used for statistical analysis during the lossy trasformation table creation.

  Default: **100000**


- `-t, --temp-directory [directory]`

  Set directory for holding temporary files. 

  Default: **\_\_temp\_\_**

- `-T, --threads [num]`

  Specify the number of working threads

  Default: *4* (if the system offers less than 4 cores, number of threads will be automatically adjusted)

> **Note**: In order to take the advantage of multi-threading, [pigz](http://zlib.net/pigz/) binary should be located within the PATH. Otherwise, you should use SCALCE with -T1 (single thread) option

